---
title: XFS note
category: tech
tags: [fs]
---

* TOC
{:toc}

XFS note

# Term

- AG:  Allocation group

- AGF: AG Free Space Block

- AGFL

The AG Free List is located in the 4th sector of each AG and is known as
the AGFL. It is an array of AG relative block pointers for reserved space
for growing the free space B+trees. This space cannot be used for general
user data including inodes, data, directories and extended attributes.

- AGI

Each AG manages its own inodes. The third sector in the AG contains
information about the AG’s inodes and is known as the AGI.

- CIL: Committed Item List

- AIL: Active Item List

# introduction

## mount option & sysctl interface

[The SGI XFS Filesystem](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/xfs.html)

## Getting to know the XFS file system

[Getting to know the XFS file system](https://www.ufsexplorer.com/articles/storage-technologies/xfs-file-system/)

### Basic structure of the file system

The file system itself can be divided into up to three separate parts:

#### Data section

The data section contains the metadata of the file system and the data of
user files.

-  allocation group (min: 16MB, max: 1TB)

Free extents in the allocation group are managed using a pair of B+ trees.
Their entries contain information about the starting block address of a
free-space region and its length in blocks. The first B+ tree is indexed by
the address value, whereas the second one – by the length value. 

- inode location

The locations of inodes within the allocation group are also indexed using
a B+ tree. Its records contain the offset for each 64-inode-chunk and a flag
for each inode within a chunk indicating whether it is in use.

- file extents

A similar approach is used to keep track of extents assigned to files. The
descriptor of each extent, besides its address and length in blocks, contains
the logical offset from the start of the file and a flag that characterizes
an extent as preallocated but not yet written to. Extent descriptors are
usually stored as a linear array embedded into the file’s inode. Yet, if
the number of extents is too large, they are indexed using another B+ tree,
whose root is located in the file’s inode.

- delayed allocation

XFS implements delayed allocation to improve write performance and reduce
file system fragmentation. A virtual extent is first built in the memory
and the appropriate amount of space is reserved for it in the file system.
However, the exact location of the data remains unknown until XFS makes
the decision to actually write it. Thus, some short-lived temporary files
might never get allocated to real blocks on the storage.


#### Log (journal) section

This area stores the modifications to the file system metadata. The entry
in the log for each structural item consists of header information that
describes it and a copy of the new image of this item as it should appear
on the disk. The entry is kept in the log until those changes are actually
committed to the data section. In case of a crash, the log can be read out
to complete the interrupted operations and restore the file system consistency.
This section can be located withing the data section itself or even externally
on a separate device for enhanced speed/reliability, depending on the
configuration.

[Ch14 journal log: XFS Algorithms & Data Structures 3rd](https://ftp.ntu.edu.tw/linux/utils/fs/xfs/docs/xfs_filesystem_structure.pdf)

The XFS journal exists on disk as a reserved extent of blocks within the
filesystem, or as a separate journal device. The journal itself can be
thought of as a series of log records; each log record contains a part of
or a whole transaction.

A transaction consists of a series of log operation headers (“log items”),
formatting structures, and raw data. The first operation in a transaction
establishes the transaction ID and the last operation is a commit record.
The operations recorded between the start and commit operations represent
the metadata changes made by the transaction. If the commit operation is
missing, the transaction is incomplete and cannot be recovered.


#### Real-time section

This optional section stores only the data of real-time files – ones with
special I/O speed requirements. It usually placed on a separate high-performance
storage device. The section is divided into a number of extents of a fixed size.
The allocation in it is performed in a more simple manner. It is managed with
the help of a linear bitmap, and the free space is indexed using a
two-dimensional array.

## Introduction to XFS Transaction Mechanism

[Introduction to XFS Transaction Mechanism](https://blogs.oracle.com/linux/post/introduction-to-xfs-transaction-mechanism)

Modifying and updating metadata contents consists of three steps:

### High level transactions: build CIL

- high level transactions are created to service a filesystem modification
request received through a system call (e.g. fallocate())

- Metadata items modified during servicing the system call are added to
a list owned by the high level transaction

- There could be several high level transactions executing at any given time.

- After completing all the required metadata modifications in memory, the
high level transaction is committed i.e The in-core metadata items owned by
the high level transaction are moved to a global list called
Committed Item List (CIL).

- Hence, The CIL consists of in-core metadata items that were modified and
committed by one or more high level transactions.

### Checkpoint transactions

- These transactions process metadata items present in the CIL

- The following actions are performed by a Checkpoint transaction once
sufficient number of metadata items have accumulated in the CIL

    - Format each in-core metadata in the CIL to a metadata specific
    in-core structure.

    - Formatted structures are written to the the on-disk log

    - The corresponding in-core metadata are then moved to the Active
    Item List (AIL).

### xfsaild: update on-disk structure

- wakes up at regular intervals to process in-core metadata that were
added to AIL

- It copies the contents from fields of modified in-core metadata
structures over to the on-disk structures.

- The updated on-disk structures is then written to the disk.

# on-disk layout

## XFS layout introduction

`man xfs`

### data section

The data section contains all the **filesystem metadata (inodes, directories,
indirect blocks)** as well as the **user file data** for ordinary  (non-realtime)
files and **the log area** if the log is internal to the data section.  The
data section is divided into a number of allocation groups.  The number and
size of the allocation groups are chosen by mkfs.xfs(8) so  that  there  is
normally  a small  number  of  equal-sized  groups. The number of allocation
groups controls the amount of parallelism available in file and block
allocation.  It should be increased from the default if there is sufficient
memory and a lot of  allocation  activity.  Then number of allocation groups
should not be set very high, since this can cause large amounts of CPU time
to be used by the filesystem, especially when the filesystem is nearly full.
More allocation groups are added (of the original size) when xfs_growfs(8)
is run.

### log section

The  log  section  (or  area,  if  it  is  internal to the data section) is
used to **store changes to filesystem metadata while the filesystem is running
until those changes are made to the data section**.  It is written **sequentially**
during  normal  operation and **read only during mount**.  When mounting a
filesystem after a crash, the log is read to complete operations that were
in progress at the time of the crash.

### realtime section

The  realtime  section  is used to **store the data of realtime files**.  These
files had an attribute bit set through xfsctl(3) after file creation, before
any data was written to the file.  The realtime section is divided into a
number of extents  of  fixed  size (specified  at mkfs.xfs(8) time).  Each
file in the realtime section has an extent size that is a multiple of the
realtime section extent size.

### AG

Each allocation group contains several data structures.  The first sector
contains the superblock.  For  allocation  groups  after the  first,  the
superblock  is just a copy and is not updated after mkfs.xfs(8).  The next
three sectors contain information for block and inode allocation within
the allocation group.  Also contained within each allocation group are
data structures to locate free blocks and inodes; these are located
through the header structures.

- superblock:                   sector 0

- block/inode allocation info:  sector 1 ~ 3

- data structures for locating free blocks and inodes

## one XFS format introduction in Chinese

[XFS文件系统结构](https://zorrozou.github.io/docs/xfs/)

Covers AG format and File extent.


## ondisk data structures

### AG

[ struct xfs_agf](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_format.h?h=v6.12#n482)

[ struct xfs_agi](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_format.h?h=v6.12#n589)

### superblock

[struct xfs_dsb](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_format.h?h=v6.12#n181)

- internal log section can be found from sb->sb_logstart


### inode

[struct xfs_dinode](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_format.h?h=v6.12#n794)

### log ondisk structure

[`struct xfs_trans_header`](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_log_format.h?h=v6.12#n206)

[`struct xfs_inode_log_format`](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_log_format.h?h=v6.12#n273)

[`struct xfs_log_dinode`](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/fs/xfs/libxfs/xfs_log_format.h?h=v6.12#n399)


# XFS Design & implementation

[XFS Delayed Logging Design](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v6.12/filesystems/xfs/xfs-delayed-logging-design.html)
