---
title: bpf aio idea
category: tech
tags: [linux kernel, bpf, aio, storage]
---

bpf aio idea

* TOC
{:toc}


# Requirement

## Interface
- provide aio interface for bpf prog(so far, ublk is main user), but any
kernel component which has IO logic may benefit from bpf aio

## Use cases

- fs aio

- tcp socket aio

    - not like fs aio, tcp socket is byte stream orinted, so two SEND IOs have
    to be submitted in order, and usually only one RECV IO can be in-progress

    - but it should be possible to share same aio interface with fs aio

    - cover UDP socket?

- others?

# Design
## FS aio design

- only submitted in specified user context, and user passes FD from map
to prog, and bpf prog tries to build & submit kiocb in current context first
with IOCB_NOWAIT; If -EAGAIN is returned, switch to submit this aio in kernel
wq context

- when the aio is completed, user-defined aio completion callback is called,
and the callback is defined by bpf struct_ops

## TCP socket aio design

- one bpf_map is required for storing the current aio link


## how to avoid bpf_aio leak?

# problem

So far bpf_aio_alloc() isn't marked as KF_ACQUIRE, and bpf_aio_release()
isn't marked as KF_RELEASE. Because the 'aio' instance ownership needs to
transfer to kernel via bpf_aio_submit(), bpf verifier doesn't support this
way, since for anything returned from kfunc(KF_ACQUIRE) it is either released
by kfunc(KF_RELEASE), or transferred to map.

Amery Hung is writing the patch of [bpf: Support getting referenced kptr from struct_ops argument]
(https://lore.kernel.org/bpf/20241220195619.2022866-2-amery.hung@gmail.com/),
so that one struct_ops callback may acquire reference of one parameter marked
as `__ref`, and the callback has to call kfunc(KF_RELEASE) or transfer it
to map.

This way may avoid bpf_aio leak more or less by adding `bpf_aio_release_cb(KF_RELEASE)`,
and call it in callback `->complete_cb(aio__ref)`, so the `bpf_aio` instance
can be guaranteed to be released in callack, however

- bpf_aio_alloc() still can't be marked as KF_ACQUIRE for the above reason
- other code path(failure handling) has to call `bpf_aio_release_cb()`

Is there any other way to transfer kptr allocated from KF_ACQUIRE to kernel?


# Ideas

## Does `aio_ctx` need to defined?

## Can bpf aio prog be attached/detached in generic way?

