---
title: sed-opal notes
category: tech
tags: [storage, encryption, sed-opal]
---

sed-opal notes

* TOC
{:toc}


# SED-OPAL terms

- SED

Self-encrypting drives

- OPAL

The Opal Storage Specification is a set of specifications for features of
data storage devices (such as hard disk drives and solid state drives) that
enhance their security. For example, it defines a way of encrypting the
stored data so that an unauthorized person who gains possession of the device
cannot see the data. That is, it is a specification for self-encrypting drives (SED).

- KEK

Key Encryption Key (KEK), which encrypts the Media Encryption Key (MEK)

- MEK

Media Encryption Key

The MEK is generated internally in the SED and is persistently stored in
encrypted form; its plain text is kept only within the SED controller and
only while the SED has power. 

- unlock

- LUKS

Linux Unified Key Setup


# sed-opal introduction

## what is SED?

[One sed-opal blog](https://www.trentonsystems.com/blog/self-encrypting-drives)

Self-encrypting drives (SEDs) supporting Opal 2.0 use hardware encryption
technology to secure data stored in them. By encrypting the entire drive,
users do not have to worry about their data being accessed if the drive,
laptop or mobile device gets stolen or lost.

An Authentication Credential (which may be derived from a password,
passphrase or other authentication mechanism) is used to generate a Key
Encryption Key (KEK), which encrypts the Media Encryption Key (MEK) before
it is stored in the SED.  The MEK is generated internally in the SED and is
persistently stored in encrypted form; its plain text is kept only within
the SED controller and only while the SED has power. When the SED no longer
has power, the MEK plain text is lost, rendering the drive “locked.”

Upon power on, the user supplies a password, passphrase or other authentication
mechanism, from which the host application generates an Authentication Credential.
This credential is then sent to the SED to unlock the drive and provide access
to the data.  If the credential provided is correct, a Key Encryption Key (KEK)
decrypts the encrypted MEK, which can then encrypt/decrypt data.

According to a joint whitepaper released by the Trusted Computing Group and NVMe
Express, storage devices implementing Opal “are built to protect the confidentiality
of stored user ‘Data at Rest’ (DAR) against unauthorized access once it leaves the
owner’s control, when or after the storage device has been power cycled.”


## Opal Storage Specification

[Opal wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opal_Storage_Specification)


### SSC Overview

The Opal SSC (Security Subsystem Class) is an implementation profile for
Storage Devices built to:

- Protect the confidentiality of stored user data against unauthorized access once it
leaves the owner's control (involving a power cycle and subsequent deauthentication).

- Enable interoperability between multiple SD vendors.[1



## Self-encrypting drives

[SED](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Self-encrypting_drives)


The term "self-encrypting drive" (SED) is now common when referring to HDDs or SSDs
with built-in full-disk encryption. OPAL is a set of specifications for self-encrypting
drives developed by the Trusted Computing Group.

Many self-encrypting drives available today implement the OPAL 2.0 and Enterprise
standards developed by the Trusted Computing Group (TCG). Enterprise SAS versions of
the TCG standard are called "TCG Enterprise" drives. The hardware manufactured according
to the standards is labeled accordingly.

Unlocking of the drive can be done during operating system runtime using software utilities,
in a pre-boot authentication environment, or with a #BIOS based ATA-password on power up.

### Key management technical implementation

Key management takes place within the disk controller and encryption keys are usually 128 or
256 bit Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).

Self-encrypting drives adhering to the TCG OPAL 2.0 standard specification (almost all
modern self-encrypting drives) implement key management via an authentication key, and a
2nd-level data encryption key. The data encryption key is the key against which data on
the drive is actually encrypted. The authentication key is the user-facing 1st-level
passphrase which decrypts the data encryption key (which in turn decrypts the data).

This approach has specific advantages:

- Allows the user to change the passphrase without losing the existing encrypted
data on the disk This improves security, as it is fast and easy to respond to
security threats and revoke a compromised passphrase

- Facilitates near-instant and cryptographically secure full disk erasure.

For those who are familiar, this concept is similar to the LUKS key management layer
often used in a dm-crypt deployment. Using LUKS, the user can have multiple different
keys (passphrases or keyfiles) to decrypt the master-key, which in turn decrypts the
underlying data. This approach allows the user to change or revoke these keys as
required without needing to re-encrypt the data, as the master 2nd-level encryption
key is unchanged (itself being re-encrypted by the new passphrase).

If a user wishes to "enable" encryption at a later stage, they are able to configure
an authentication key (such as a passphrase) which encrypts the existing data
encryption key. The user will then be prompted for their passphrase when decrypting
the data encryption key in the future. Crucially, because the existing data
encryption key is not regenerated, setting a passphrase allows for the drive to be
locked while preserving existing encrypted data on the disk, avoiding the need for
the drive to be re-encrypted.

### Advantages

- Easier to setup (compared to software-based encryption)

- Notably transparent to the user, except for initial bootup authentication

- Data-at-Rest protection

- Increased performance (CPU is freed up from calculations to encrypt and decrypt)

- The main CPU and RAM are eliminated as possible attack targets

- Optimally fast and #Secure disk erasure (sanitation) (regardless of disk size)

- Protection from alternative boot methods due to the possibility to encrypt the
MBR, rendering the drive inaccessible before pre-boot authentication


## LUKS

[LUKS](https://www.howtogeek.com/what-is-luks-and-how-does-it-secure-your-linux-file-system/)

### What Is LUKS on Linux?

Linux Unified Key Setup (or LUKS for short), is a disk encryption specification
widely used in Linux systems. Created by Clemens Fruhwirth in 2004, it's
designed to provide a standardized encryption mechanism that's both secure and
user-friendly. It protects data by encrypting it inside physical and logical disk
partitions so that only authorized users can access the content of that encrypted
partition. You can think of it as similar to Windows BitLocker.

LUKS operates on a block level. It encrypts whole partitions or disks rather
than individual files. It uses strong encryption algorithms like AES (Advanced
Encryption Standard). It uses the partition header to store the necessary setup
information such as the encryption algorithm and key size. This header is what
sets LUKS apart from dm-crypt. If the header becomes corrupted, you won't be
able to decrypt the device.

### How LUKS Works

LUKS encryption creates an encrypted container called LUKS volume on a disk
partition. It uses symmetric algorithms such as AES to encrypt the volume
which can only be accessed using a passphrase. When you unlock the LUKS
volume, it becomes accessible like a regular block device. So you can read
from it and write to it.

LUKS stores its encryption metadata in a special section at the beginning
of the encrypted partition called the LUKS header. This header contains
some critical information such as the cipher and mode, hash function, and
key slots. The actual encrypting of the partition is done using a master
key. This master key is randomly generated when the LUKS setup is
initialized. This master key is what directly encrypts and decrypts the
data on the partition. The passphrase doesn't encrypt the data. Instead,
it encrypts the master key stored in the key slots.

If you want to access the encrypted data, LUKS requires you to enter a
passphrase. This passphrase is then used for decrypting the master key
stored in one of the key slots. After the master key is decrypted, that
key in turn is used to decrypt the data on the partition.

### Why You Should Use LUKS

LUKS is commonly used for full disk encryption. You can encrypt the root
partition of your Linux system during installation so that no one without
authorization can access the system files. You may also encrypt the boot
partition in the Linux system to protect against tampering with the Linux
kernel. If you're using systemd, then you can also encrypt individual
home directories.

LUKS supports multiple key slots, giving you the opportunity to assign
different passphrases for the same encrypted partition. So, if you have
a multi-user setup, each user can have an individual decryption key
without needing to share a common passphrase. Moreover, if one passphrase
is forgotten, other ones can be used to access the data.

It protects your device from physical theft. Even if your laptop, external
hard drive, or other storage devices are stolen, the data inside remains
inaccessible without the correct decryption key.

### It Has Some Catches

One of the biggest drawbacks of using full disk encryption lies in
performance issues. Decrypting data on the fly requires processing power,
resulting in slower read-write speeds. If you have modern hardware, the
difference might be negligible sometimes, but it's not totally out of
the question. You'll also experience increased boot time because the
system needs to decrypt the entire drive before fully loading the
operating system. You can read more about this in this Reddit thread
and this benchmark test.

Another important note is that LUKS disk encryption will only protect
your data when your system is turned off. If your laptop is stolen while
it's powered on and the drive is already decrypted, the thief could
potentially access your data without needing to bypass the encryption.
Once decrypted, anyone has access to the files on that drive.

Setting up LUKS encryption is not an easy process on pre-installed Linux
systems. It requires a full backup so that you can restore important data
in case you lose it. Speaking of backups, encrypted backups need careful
handling. If you lose your decryption key, you may never recover your data.

### How to Set Up LUKS Encryption

- encrypt <device>

Type the following command:

```
cryptsetup luksFormat <device>
```

Sample outputs:

```
WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on <device> irrevocably.

Are you sure? (Type 'yes' in capital letters): YES
Enter passphrase for <device>: 
Verify passphrase: 
```

- Verify if it is successfull:

```
cryptsetup isLuks <device> && echo Success
```

- To see a summary of the encryption information for the device:

```
# cryptsetup luksDump <device>
```

Example output:

```
LUKS header information
Version:       	2
Epoch:         	3
Metadata area: 	16384 [bytes]
Keyslots area: 	16744448 [bytes]
UUID:          	4d39ff52-e6fe-4180-8af5-0d03579a6e6e
Label:         	(no label)
Subsystem:     	(no subsystem)
Flags:       	(no flags)

Data segments:
  0: crypt
	offset: 16777216 [bytes]
	length: (whole device)
	cipher: aes-xts-plain64
	sector: 512 [bytes]

Keyslots:
  0: luks2
	Key:        512 bits
	Priority:   normal
	Cipher:     aes-xts-plain64
	Cipher key: 512 bits
	PBKDF:      argon2id
	Time cost:  11
	Memory:     1048576
	Threads:    4
	Salt:       b2 00 0f 15 83 3b d9 fd 07 83 a1 da de ed 78 89 
	            cd a0 e8 7e e1 da ea b4 71 ae 8d 6d 40 c2 6e b1 
	AF stripes: 4000
	AF hash:    sha256
	Area offset:32768 [bytes]
	Area length:258048 [bytes]
	Digest ID:  0
Tokens:
Digests:
  0: pbkdf2
	Hash:       sha256
	Iterations: 315076
	Salt:       8e 24 27 8a bb 15 0a b4 6f b4 96 ab 37 56 32 e0 
	            9a a3 e4 9c 6f 97 fd 95 a4 61 a8 b0 b4 9e aa b5 
	Digest:     04 27 b1 ba ed 80 3f da 30 63 9a fa 79 d0 b6 c2 
	            f5 3a 68 49 63 bf 6d b1 6c 38 2e 13 b5 47 b3 d1 

```

- Create a mapping to access the decrypted contents on the device:

```
# cryptsetup luksOpen <device> <name>
```

Example output:

```
/dev/mapper/<name> mapping is created.
```


- Check the mapping status:

```
# cryptsetup -v status  <name>
```

Example output:

```
/dev/mapper/<name> is active.
  type:    LUKS2
  cipher:  aes-xts-plain64
  keysize: 512 bits
  key location: keyring
  device:  /dev/sdb
  sector size:  512
  offset:  32768 sectors
  size:    16744448 sectors
  mode:    read/write
Command successful.
```
